---
title: "Programming with models: reproducibility and NIMBLE"
subtitle: "Valencia International Bayesian Analysis Summer School Workshop"
output: html_document
---


# Why develop an algorithm in NIMBLE?

 - You get flexible hierarchical modeling infrastructure "for free".
 - The NIMBLE system allows you to program essentially arbitrary computations.
 - You can combine your method with or build on top of ones already available in NIMBLE.
 - You can distribute your method as a separate package that uses NIMBLE.




# Why develop an algorithm in NIMBLE?

 - You get flexible hierarchical modeling infrastructure "for free".
    - query model structure
    - generic calculate and simulate functions
    - data structures for storing values from a model
 - The NIMBLE system allows you to program essentially arbitrary computations.
    - most R mathematical functionality
    - linear algebra
    - call out to arbitrary R and C/C++ code
 - You can combine your method with or build on top of ones already available in NIMBLE.
    - nimbleFunctions can call other nimbleFunctions
 - You can distribute your method as a separate package that uses NIMBLE.

# Reproducible research

Algorithm/methods developers tend to write their own algorithms in R, Python, MATLAB, or C/C++ because they are implementing new computations and need language flexibility.

Drawbacks:

 - code may not be discoverable by a large audience
 - users must become familiar with a new system
 - code may not be carefully tested
 - parts of the code may duplicate other work

Applied statisticians tend to write their own model-specific code in R, Python, MATLAB, or C/C++ because available methods are not flexible enough (e.g., specialized MCMC samplers, specialized numerical implementation).

Drawbacks:

 - parts of the code may duplicate other work, requiring additional work of the analyst
 - code may not be well-tested

# Reproducible research and NIMBLE

 - nimbleFunctions allow an algorithm to work on any (appropriate) hierarchical model, while providing language flexibility
 - new MCMC samplers can be built and used only on parts of a model, without requiring development of an entire MCMC system
 - specialized MCMC systems can be built on top of NIMBLE's MCMC engine

 - new distributions and functions can be written for use with BUGS
 - new samplers and "mini"-algorithms can be used in the context of a larger system


### NIMBLE "programming with models"

See <a href="https://amstat.tandfonline.com/eprint/6vE8RwXmBRRrUvvhSU8e/full#.XS9VGJNKjKo" target="_blank" style="color: blue">de Valpine and Turek et. al. (2017)</a>.
